# Chapter 1. Introduction to Linux 

Linux is the most widely used operating system, used in everything from mobile devices to the cloud. You might not be familiar with the concept of an operating system. Or you might be using an operating system such as Microsoft Windows without giving it too much thought. Or maybe you are new to Linux. To set the scene and get you in the right mindset, we’ll take a bird’s-eye view of operating systems and Linux in this chapter. We’ll first discuss what modern means in the context of the book. Then we’ll review a high-level Linux backstory, looking at important events and phases over the past 30 years. Further, in this chapter you’ll learn what the role of an operating system is in general and how Linux fills this role. We also take a quick look at what Linux distributions are and what resource visibility means. If you’re new to operating systems and Linux, you’ll want to read the entire chapter. If you’re already experienced with Linux, you might want to jump to “A Ten-Thousand-Foot View of Linux”, which provides a visual overview as well as mapping to the book’s chapters. But before we get into the technicalities, let’s first step back a bit and focus on what we mean when we say “modern Linux.” This is, surprisingly, a nontrivial matter.

## What Are Modern Environments? 

The book title specifies modern, but what does that really mean? Well, in the context of this book, it can mean anything from cloud computing to a Raspberry Pi. In addition, the recent rise of Docker and related innovations in infrastructure has dramatically changed the landscape for developers and infrastructure operators alike.Let’s take a closer look at some of these modern environments and the prominent role Linux plays in them:

- Mobile devices When I say “mobile phone” to our kids, they say, “In contrast to what?” In all fairness and seriousness, these days many phones— depending on who you ask, up to 80% or more—as well as tablets run Android, which is a Linux variant. These environments have aggressive requirements around power consumption and robustness, as we depend on them on a daily basis. If you’re interested in developing Android apps, consider visiting the Android developer site for more information. 
- Cloud computing With the cloud, we see at scale a similar pattern as in the mobile and micro space. There are new, powerful, secure, and energy-saving CPU architectures such as the successful ARM-based AWS Graviton offerings, as well as the established heavy-lifting outsourcing to cloud providers, especially in the context of open source software. 
- Internet of (Smart) Things I’m sure you’ve seen a lot of Internet of Things (IoT)–related projects and products, from sensors to drones. Many of us have already been exposed to smart appliances and smart cars. These environments have even more challenging requirements around power consumption than mobile devices. In addition, they might not even be running all the time but, for example, only wake up once a day to transmit some data. Another important aspect of these environments is real-time capabilities. If you’re interested in getting started with Linux in the IoT context, consider the AWS IoT EduKit. 
- Diversity of processor architectures For the past 30 years or so, Intel has been the leading CPU manufacturer, dominating the microcomputer and personal computer space. Intel’s x86 architecture was considered the gold standard. The open approach that IBM took (publishing the specificationsand enabling others to offer compatible devices) was promising, resulting in x86 clones that also used Intel chips, at least initially. While Intel is still widely used in desktop and laptop systems, with the rise of mobile devices we’ve seen the increasing uptake of the ARM architecture and recently RISC-V. At the same time, multi-arch programming languages and tooling, such as Go or Rust, are becoming more and more widespread, creating a perfect storm.

All of these environments are examples of what I consider modern environments. And most, if not all of them, run on or use Linux in one form or another. Now that we know about the modern (hardware) systems, you might wonder how we got here and how Linux came into being.

