## link

- https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0164121214001162

## title

Scalable news recommendation using multi-dimensional similarity and Jaccard–Kmeans clustering

## abstract

In order to solve the scalability problem in news recommendation, a scalable news recommendation method is proposed. The method includes the multi-dimensional similarity calculation, the Jaccard–Kmeans fast clustering and the Top-N recommendation. The multi-dimensional similarity calculation method is used to compute the integrated similarity between users, which considers abundant content feature of news, behaviors of users, and the time of these behaviors occurring. Based on traditional K-means algorithm, the Jaccard–Kmeans fast clustering method is proposed. This clustering method first computes the above multi-dimensional similarity, then generates multiple cluster centers with user behavior feature and news content feature, and evaluates the clustering results according to cohesiveness. The Top-N recommendation method integrates a time factor into the final recommendation. Experiment results prove that the proposed method can enhance the scalability of news recommendation, significantly improve the recommendation accuracy in condition of data sparsity, and improve the timeliness of news recommendation.

# Introduction

With the rapid development of network technology, information becomes more and more abundant. Traditional media and network media generate large amounts of news, which makes users spend a lot of time finding news they are interested in (Shang et al., 2010). However, through collecting and analyzing users’ features, news recommendation can excavate users’ potential interests and behavior rules, formulate the corresponding news filtering strategies, and recommend personalized news to users. As a common technology in personalized recommendation, collaborative filtering recommendation is divided into user-based collaborative filtering (Qi et al., 2012) and item-based collaborative filtering (Ye et al., 2012). The user-based collaborative filtering needs to find neighbors of target users, and then recommends the target users with items which the target users’ neighbors are interested in but the target users do not focus on. The item-based collaborative filtering finds items that are similar with the target items, and recommends these items to the users who pay attention on the target items.


With increasing numbers of users and news, the problems that news recommendation will encounter are growing evidently. These problems mainly manifest in following two aspects. One of the problems is the data sparsity. With the increasing scale of personalized news recommendation, the number of news often reaches millions, which leads to the fact that the possibility of two users focusing on the same news becomes less. So users’ nearest neighbors calculated by traditional similarity algorithm is not appropriate, which decreases the quality of personalized news recommendation. The other problem is the scalability of algorithm. The increasing data scale in recommendation systems cause a large amount of calculation, which makes it difficult to satisfy the real-time requirement of recommendation systems.

Aiming at the data sparsity problem, current solutions mainly include default-value filling (Guo, 2008, Sun, 2005), predict filling (Deng et al., 2003, Zhang and Yang, 2012) and improving traditional similarity measurement. Default-value filling sets the ratings of items without appraisal as the average value of all users’ ratings or the most frequent rating. However, setting default-value is a low credible method. This method eliminates the personalized users’ ratings, and cannot effectively improve the quality of recommendation. At the same time, a large number of fillings will occupy larger memory space, making the space complexity of the algorithm increase rapidly. Contrasted with default-value filling, predict filling predicts the ratings of items according to the similar users or items, which can reduce the sparsity of ratings. Although predict filling is more accurate than default-value filling, this method occupies large memory space and increases the space complexity. In improving traditional similarity measurement, PIP method (Liang, 2010) is put forward to measure the similarity between users. The calculating method of PIP is composed of three factors: Proximity indicates the difference between the ratings of two users; Impact indicates the preferences of two users to items; Popularity indicates the difference of the current rating and the average ratings. PIP calculates the similarity between two users through the above three factors. This method solves the data sparsity problem in collaborative filtering. But on condition of item ratings including more factors, this method needs to calculate all possible rating factors, which makes calculation inaccurate and massive. In order to resolve the scalability issue, some researchers (Li, 2011, Jing, 2011) parallelize traditional collaborative filtering recommendation algorithm with the help of the MapReduce model to reduce the calculating time. Other researchers (Dakhel, 2011, Das and Datar, 2007, Roh, 2003) propose to reduce the nearest neighbor search space of users or items by clustering users or items, and sequentially improving the scalability of collaborative filtering. The main clustering methods include K-means cluster, LSH (Locality Sensitive Hashing) clustering, neural network, etc. Generally, the neighbors of users/items obtained by clustering are biased, which inevitably results in the decline of recommendation quality, although clustering can improve the scalability.

This paper proposes a scalable news recommendation method to solve the above problems, including the multi-dimensional similarity calculation method, the Jaccard–Kmeans fast clustering method and the Top-N recommendation method. The multi-dimensional similarity calculation method computes the similarity between users combining abundant content feature of news with the behavior and time feature of users, solving the data sparsity problem in traditional collaborative filtering. Then, based on the traditional K-means algorithm, the Jaccard–Kmeans fast clustering method is proposed, which includes the above new similarity measurement method, a new multiple cluster centers generation method, and a new evaluation methodology of clustering results. The Jaccard–Kmeans clustering method provides better user clustering effect and enhances the scalability of recommendation systems. The Top-N recommendation method integrates the time factor into the final recommendation, improving the timeliness of news recommendation.

Subsequent content is organized as follows. Second 2 provides a review of news recommendation methods proposed in recent years. Second 3 elaborates the multi-dimensional similarity calculation method using user behaviors and news contents, which includes modeling user interest and calculating integrated similarity. Second 4 describes our proposed Jaccard–Kmeans fast clustering method. Second 5 gives the Top-N recommendation method considering the time factor. Second 6 analyzes the experiment schemes and results from multiple perspectives to evaluate the advantages of the method in this paper. Second 7 concludes the method and gives prospects of the future research work.

